---
title: Priorities
category: Infusion
---

Many elements of an Infusion application (in particular,
[Listeners](InfusionEventSystem.md#registering-a-listener-to-an-event), [Model
Listeners](ChangeApplierAPI.md#model-listener-declaration), [Options Distributions](IoCSS.md) and
[Subcomponents](SubcomponentDeclaration.md)) accept a standardised entry named ``priority`` which allows the position of
that element within a list of similar elements to be adjusted. Depending on what the element is, the effect of the
priority will be different &#8212; for example, a listener may be notified earlier or later than another listener, or a
set of options or grades may take priority over another during options merging.

The priority system is designed to be "open" in the face of evolving application designs that are worked on by different
groups. As well as standard fixed priorities (represented by numbers or _extremal values_ such as `"first"` or
`"last"`), Infusion priorities may be _constraint-based_ in which an element defines its priority only with respect to
another element which is identified by _namespace_. The syntax and idiom for namespaces follows that for [event
listeners](InfusionEventSystem.md#registering-a-listener-to-an-event). These constraint-based priorities are much less
brittle than the use of fixed priorities, and are recommended whenever a priority directive seems to be required.

## Supported values for priorities

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <td>Type</td>
      <td>Description</td>
      <td>Examples</td>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>Numeric</td>
        <td>
            An <em>integer value</em> representing a fixed priority (not generally recommended). In general, higher
            numbers represent "greater priority" with whatever meaning that takes in the relevant context. For example,
            a listener with higher priority will fire before one with a lower priority, or options with higher priority
            will merge on top of options with a lower priority
        </td>
        <td>1, 10, 100</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Constraint</td>
        <td>
            Either of the strings <code>before</code> or <code>after</code> followed by the <code>namespace</code> of
            some other element (the "target element") of the same type, separated by a colon. The framework will sort
            all the elements in the same set so that this element will be placed immediately before or after the target
            element, unless a further constraint positions a third listener in between
            them.</td><td><code>"before:bindMarkup"</code>, <code>"after:computeLayout"</code>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Extremal Priority</td>
        <td>
            Either of the strings <code>first</code> or <code>last</code>, either by themselves, or followed by an
            <strong>extremal priority class</strong> (currently supported values <code>testing</code> and
            <code>authoring</code>) separated by a colon. Elements annotated <code>first</code> or <code>last</code>
            will sort either before or after all those which have been given finite numerical priorities (although a
            constraint-based priority will always have its directive honoured, even if it involves being situated beyond
            an element with extremal priority). If the string is followed by <code>:class</code> for one of the
            supported classes, this increases the "level of infinity" that the priority represents to that of the class,
            so that it will beat any extremal priority of a lower class or an unqualified extremal priority. The
            currently supported extremal priority classes are <code>testing</code> and <code>authoring</code>. So, an
            element listed <code>last:authoring</code> will beat an element listed <code>last:testing</code>, which will
            beat any element merely listed as <code>last</code>.
        </td>
        <td><code>"last"</code>, <code>"last:testing"</code></td>
  </tbody>
</table>

Note that the framework's algorithm for sorting by priority uses a [stable sorting
algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorting_algorithm#Stability) so that in the absence of any priorities, any
original ordering of the elements will be preserved. Elements without any priority will sort close to those which have
been specified with an explicit numeric priority of 0, whilst retaining any original relative ordering. In the case of
event listeners, this will be significant since it will respect any procedural order of addition, as well as any order
resulting from grade merging. For options distributions, the natural ordering will be derived instead from the tree's
topology (distributions which travelled a longer distance will be weaker than those which travelled a shorter distance),
and numeric priorities should not be used.

## Example of priority resolution for listeners

Here is part of a grade definition from the framework's Uploader component implementation, showing a recommended use of
a constraint-based priority:

```javascript
fluid.defaults("fluid.uploader.errorPanel.section", {
    gradeNames: ["fluid.viewComponent"],
    // ...
    listeners: {
        "onCreate.bindHandlers": {
            funcName: "fluid.uploader.errorPanel.section.bindHandlers",
            priority: "before:refreshView"
        },
        "onCreate.refreshView": "{that}.refreshView"
    }
});
```

Amongst the two `onCreate` listeners, the framework guarantees that the `bindHandlers` listener will always be invoked
before `refreshView`.

## Table of supported sites for priorities and namespaces

The following table lists all the locations in component options where priorities are supported, together with some
notes about their limitations and interpretation.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <td>Options Record Entry</td>
      <td>Polarity</td>
      <td>Notes</td>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
      <tr>
          <td><a href="InfusionEventSystem.md#registering-a-listener-to-an-event"><code>listeners</code></a></td>
          <td>Lower numeric numbers, <code>last</code>, and <code>after</code> will fire later than others</td>
          <td>Full support for constraints, listeners uniquified based on <code>namespace</code></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="ChangeApplierAPI.md#model-listener-declaration"><code>modelListeners</code></a></td>
        <td>
            Ordering as for <code>listeners</code>. Model listeners will be sorted globally across the entire <a
            href="ModelRelay.md">model skeleton</a> by priority when a transaction concludes.
        </td>
        <td>Full support for constraints, model listeners uniquified based on <code>namespace</code></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
          <td><a href="ModelRelay.md#explicit-model-relay-style"><code>modelRelay</code></a></td>
          <td>
            Ordering as for <code>listeners</code>. Model relay rules will be sorted locally at the point of responding
            to a model change within a <a href="ModelRelay.md">transaction</a>. Note that the same model relay rule(s)
            may operate multiple times within a transaction.
          </td>
          <td>Full support for constraints, model relay rules uniquified based on <code>namespace</code></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
          <td><a href="IoCSS.md"><code>distributeOptions</code></a></td>
          <td>
            Lower numeric numbers, <code>last</code> and <code>after</code> will appear <strong>later</strong> in the
            merge order (with merging considering to occur from left to right &#8212; note that this is the opposite
            direction in which parent <code>gradeNames</code> of a grade are considered), that is, these will represent
            <strong>stronger</strong> options that will merge on top of other options.
          </td>
          <td>
            Full support for constraints, distributions not uniquified based on <code>namespace</code> (currently). Note
            that priority for distributions with the priority field left blank will be determined by component tree
            topology &#8212; distributions which travel a further distance will have weaker ("earlier", "lower")
            priority than distributions from nearby. Numeric priorities should not be used.
          </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
          <td><a href="ContextAwareness.md"><code>contextAwareness</code></a></td>
          <td>
            Supported in both <code>adaptationRecord</code> entries and <code>checkRecord</code> entries. In checks,
            lower numeric numbers, <code>last</code>, and <code>after</code> will be executed later than others. In
            adaptations, lower numeric numbers, <code>last</code>, and <code>after</code> will have their grades
            override those which appear before
          </td>
          <td>Full support for constraints, records uniquified based on <code>namespace</code></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
          <td><a href="SubcomponentDeclaration.md"><code>components</code></a></td>
          <td>Ordering as for <code>listeners</code>. Components with lower priority will be constructed later.</td>
          <td>
            Note that there is <strong>no</strong> support for <code>namespace</code> for component declarations, and
            hence no support for constraint-based priorities. The use of priorities for subcomponent declarations is
            <strong>not recommended</strong>. You should always be able to rely on the natural data-driven (by order of
            resolving IoC references) order for instantiation of components.
          </td>
      </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
